.\" RCSid "$Id: pcomb.1,v 1.19 2023/12/12 16:31:45 greg Exp $"
.TH PCOMB 1 8/31/96 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
pcomb - combine RADIANCE pictures and/or float matrices
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pcomb
[
.B -h
][
.B -w
][
.B -ff
][
.B "\-x xres"
][
.B "\-y yres"
][
.B "\-f file"
][
.B "\-e expr"
]
[
[
.B -o
][
.B "\-s factor"
][
.B "\-c r g b"
]
.B "input .."
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Pcomb
combines equal-sized RADIANCE pictures or raw float matrices
and sends the result to the standard output.
By default, the result is just a linear combination of
the input pixels multiplied by
.I \-s
and
.I \-c
coefficients,
but an arbitrary mapping can be assigned with the
.I \-e
and
.I \-f
options, similar to
.I rcalc(1).
(The variable and function definitions in each
.I \-f source
file are read and compiled from the RADIANCE library
where it is found.)\0
Negative coefficients and functions are allowed, and
.I pcomb
will produce color values of zero where they would be negative
unless the
.I \-ff
option is used to specify floating-point matrix output.
.PP
The variables
.I ro,
.I go
and
.I bo
specify the red, green and blue output values, respectively.
Alternatively, the single variable
.I lo
can be used to specify a brightness value for black and white output.
The predefined functions
.I ri(n),
.I gi(n)
and
.I bi(n)
give the red, green and blue values for
input
.I n.
To access a pixel that is nearby the current one, these functions
also accept optional x and y offsets.
For example,
.I ri(3,-2,1)
would return the red component of the pixel from input 3
that is left 2 and up 1 from the current position.
Although x offsets may be as large as width of the input,
y offsets are limited to a small window (+/- 32 pixels) due to efficiency
considerations.
However, it is not usually necessary to worry about this problem --
if the requested offset is not available, the next best pixel is
returned instead.
.PP
For additional convenience, the function
.I li(n)
is defined as the input brightness for input
.I n.
This function also accepts x and y offsets.
.PP
The constant
.I nfiles
gives the number of input files present,
and
.I WE
gives the white efficacy (lumens/brightness) for pixel values,
which may be used with the
.I \-o
option or the le(n) values to convert to absolute
photometric units (see below).
The variables
.I x
and
.I y
give the current output pixel location for use in
spatially dependent functions, the constants
.I xmax
and
.I ymax
give the input resolution, and the constants
.I xres
and 
.I yres
give the output resolution (usually the same, but see below).
The constant functions
.I "re(n), ge(n), be(n),"
and
.I le(n)
give the exposure values for input
.I n,
and
.I pa(n)
gives the corresponding pixel aspect ratio.
Exposure values will be set to 1.0 for inputs with the
.I \-o
option set.
Finally, for inputs with stored view parameters,
the functions
.I "Ox(n), Oy(n)"
and
.I Oz(n)
return the ray origin in world coordinates for the current pixel
in input
.I n,
and
.I "Dx(n), Dy(n)"
and
.I Dz(n)
return the normalized ray direction.
In addition, the function
.I T(n)
returns the distance from the origin to the aft clipping plane
(or zero if there is no aft plane), and the function
.I S(n)
returns the solid angle of the current pixel in steradians
(always zero for parallel views).
If the current pixel is outside the view region,
.I T(n)
will return a negative value, and
.I S(n)
will return zero.
The first input input with a view is assumed to correspond to the
view of the output, which is written into the header.
.PP
The
.I \-h
option may be used to reduce the information header size, which
can grow disproportionately after multiple runs of
.I pcomb
and/or
.I pcompos(1).
The
.I \-w
option can be used to suppress warning messages about invalid
calculations.
The
.I \-o
option indicates that original pixel values are to be used for the next
input, undoing any previous exposure changes or color correction.
.PP
The
.I \-x
and
.I \-y
options can be used to specify the desired output resolution,
.I xres
and
.I yres,
and can be expressions involving other constants such as
.I xmax
and
.I ymax.
The constants
.I xres
and
.I yres
may also be specified in a file or expression.
The default output resolution is the same as the input resolution.
.PP
The
.I \-x
and
.I \-y
options must be present if there are no input files, when
the definitions of
.I ro,
.I go
and
.I bo
will be used to compute each output pixel.
This is useful for producing simple test inputs for various
purposes.
(Theoretically, one could write a complete renderer using just the
functional language...)
.PP
The standard input can be specified with a hyphen ('-').
A command that produces a RADIANCE picture or float matrix
can be given in place of a file 
by preceeding it with an exclamation point ('!').
.SH EXAMPLES
To produce a picture showing the difference between pic1 and pic2:
.IP "" .2i
pcomb \-e "ro=ri(1)\-ri(2);go=gi(1)\-gi(2);bo=bi(1)\-bi(2)" pic1 pic2 > diff
.PP
Or, more efficiently:
.IP "" .2i
pcomb pic1 \-s \-1 pic2 > diff
.PP
To precompute the gamma correction for a picture:
.IP "" .2i
pcomb \-e "ro=ri(1)^.4;go=gi(1)^.4;bo=bi(1)^.4" inp.hdr > gam.hdr
.PP
To perform some special filtering:
.IP "" .2i
pcomb \-f myfilt.cal \-x xmax/2 \-y ymax/2 input.hdr > filtered.hdr
.PP
To make a picture of a dot:
.IP "" .2i
pcomb \-x 100 \-y 100 \-e "ro=b;go=b;bo=b;b=if((x-50)^2+(y-50)^2\-25^2,0,1)" > dot
.PP
Use a depth buffer to superimpose 3-D gridlines on rendered image:
.IP "" .2i
rcollate -hi -ff -o 3000x3000 raw_orig.zbf
| pcomb -e "frac(x):x-floor(x);EPS:.0001"
-e "t=gi(2);Px=Ox(1)+t*Dx(1)-EPS;Py=Oy(1)+t*Dy(1)-EPS;Pz=Oz(1)+t*Dz(1)-EPS"
-e "Rg:0;Gg:0;Bg:1;gsiz:0.03" 
-e "ingr=gsiz-min(frac(Px),frac(Py),frac(Pz))" 
-e "ro=if(ingr,Rg,ri(1));go=if(ingr,Gg,gi(1));bo=if(ingr,Bg,bi(1))"
raw_orig.hdr - > trans_def_grid.hdr
.SH ENVIRONMENT
RAYPATH		the directories to check for auxiliary files.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getinfo(1), icalc(1), pcompos(1), pfilt(1), pvalue(1), rcalc(1),
rcollate(1), rcomb(1), rmtxop(1), rpict(1)
