.\" RCSid "$Id: rmtxop.1,v 1.32 2023/12/19 00:39:03 greg Exp $"
.TH RMTXOP 1 5/31/2014 RADIANCE
.SH NAME
rmtxop - concatenate, add, multiply, divide, transpose, scale, and convert matrices
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rmtxop
[
.B \-v
][
.B \-f[afdc]
][
.B "\-C {symbols|file}"
][
.B "\-c ce .."
][
.B "\-s sf .."
][
.B \-t
][
.B "\-rf|\-rb"
]
.B m1
[
.B ".+*/"
]
.B ".."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rmtxop
loads and concatenates or adds/multiplies/divides
together component matrix files given on the command line.
Each file must have a header containing the following metadata:
.sp
.nf
NROWS={number of rows}
NCOLS={number of columns}
NCOMP={number of components}
FORMAT={ascii|float|double|32-bit_rle_rgbe|32-bit_rle_xyze|Radiance_spectra}
.fi
.sp
The number of components indicates that each matrix element is actually
composed of multiple elements, most commonly an RGB triple.
This is essentially dividing the matrix into planes, where each component
participates in a separate calculation.
If an appropriate header is not present, it may be added with a call to
.I rcollate(1).
A matrix may be read from the standard input using a hyphen by itself ('-')
in the appropriate place on the command line.
Similarly, any of the inputs may be read from a command
instead of a file by
using quotes and a beginning exclamation point ('!').
.PP
Two special cases are handled for component matrices that are either
XML files containing BSDF data, or Radiance picture files.
In the first case, the BSDF library loads and interprets the
transmission matrix by default.
Alternatively, the front (normal-side) reflectance is selected if the
.I \-rf
option precedes the file name, or the backside reflectance if
.I \-rb
is specified.
(XML files cannot be read from the standard input or from a command.)\0
In the second case, the RGBE or XYZE values are loaded in a 3-component
matrix where the number of columns match the X-dimension of the picture, and
the number of rows match the Y-dimension.
The picture must be in standard pixel ordering, and the first row
is at the top with the first column on the left.
Any exposure changes that were applied to the pictures before
.I rmtxop
will be undone, similar to the
.I pcomb(1)
.I \-o
option.
Radiance spectral pictures with more than 3 components are also supported.
These are typically produced by
.I rtrace(1)
or
.I rfluxmtx(1).
.PP
Before each input, the
.I \-t
and
.I \-c
and/or
.I \-s
options may be used to modify the matrix.
The
.I \-t
option transposes the matrix, swapping rows and columns.
The
.I \-c
option can "transform" the element values, possibly changing
the number of components in the matrix.
For example, a 3-component matrix can be transformed into a single-component
matrix by using
.I \-c
with three coefficients.
A four-component matrix can be turned into a two-component matrix using 8
coefficients, where the first four coefficients will be used to compute
the first new component, and the second four coefficients
yield the second new component.
Note that the number of coefficients must be an even multiple of the number
of original components.
.PP
Alternatively, a set of symbolic output components may be given to the
.I \-c
option, with the following definitions:
.sp
.nf
R	- red channel
G	- green channel
B	- blue channel
X	- CIE X channel
Y	- CIE Y channel (aka., luminance or illuminance)
Z	- CIE Z channel
S	- scotopic luminance or illuminance
M	- melanopic luminance or illuminance
A	- average component value
.fi
.sp
These letters may be given in any order as a single string, and if
.I "-c RGB"
or
.I "-c XYZ"
is specified for an input picture or the
.I "-fc"
option is given, the output will be written as a RGBE or XYZE picture.
Note that conversion from a float or RGBE color space applies a conversion
of 179 lumens/watt (for CIE or melanopic output) or 412 (for scotopic output),
and the reverse happens for conversion from XYZE input to RGB or RGBE output.
Lower case versions of all these components are also supported, the only
difference is that the aforementioned efficacy factors
will be left out of the conversion.
.PP
If a matrix or picture file path is given to the
.I \-c
option, then the color space of that file will be used, instead.
.PP
The
.I \-C
option takes either a symbolic color space or an input file, and will be
applied to all subsequent matrices that do not have their own associated
.I \-c
option.
.PP
Additionally, the
.I \-s
option applies the given scalar factor(s) to the elements of the matrix.
If only one factor is provided,
it will be used for all components.
If multiple factors are given, their number must match the number of matrix
components
.I after
application of any
.I \-c
option for this input matrix or picture, even if the
.I \-s
option appears first.
.PP
If present, the second and subsequent matrices on the command
line are concatenated together, unless separated by a plus ('+'),
asterisk ('*'), or forward slash ('/') symbol,
in which case the individual matrix elements are added,
multiplied, or divided, respectively.
The concatenation operator ('.') is the default and need not be specified.
Note also that the asterisk must be quoted or escaped in most shells.
In the case of addition, the two matrices involved must have the same number
of components.
If subtraction is desired, use addition ('+') with a scaling parameter of -1
for the second matrix (the
.I \-s
option).
For element-wise multiplication and division, the second matrix is
permitted to have a single component per element, which will be
applied equally to all components of the first matrix.
If element-wise division is specified, any zero elements in the second
matrix will result in a warning and the corresponding component(s) in the
first matrix will be set to zero.
.PP
Evaluation proceeds from left to right, and all operations have
the same precedence.
If a different evaluation order is desired, pipe the result of one
.I rmtxop
command into another, as shown in one of the examples below.
.PP
The number of components in the next matrix after applying any
.I -c
transform must agree with the prior result.
For concatenation (matrix multiplication), the number of columns
in the prior result must equal the number of rows in the next matrix, and
the result will have the number of rows of the previous and the number
of columns of the next matrix.
In the case of addition, multiplication, and division,
the number of rows and columns of the prior result and the
next matrix must match, and will not be changed by the operation.
.PP
A final transpose or transform/scaling operation may be applied to
the results by appending the
.I \-t
and
.I \-c
and/or
.I \-s
options after the last matrix on the command line.
.PP
Results are sent to the standard output.
By default, the values will be written in the lowest precision format
among the inputs, but the
.I \-f[adfc]
option may be used to explicitly output components
as ASCII (-fa), binary doubles (-fd), floats (-ff), or common-exponent
colors/spectra (-fc).
In the latter case, the actual matrix dimensions are written in
the resolution string rather than the header.
Also, matrix results will be written as standard
Radiance pictures if they have either one
or three components.
In the one-component case, the output is written as grayscale.
If more than 3 components are in the final matrix and
.I -fc
is specified, the output will be a Radiance spectral picture.
.PP
The
.I \-v
option turns on verbose reporting, which announces each operation.
.SH EXAMPLES
To concatenate two matrix files with a BTDF between them and write
the result as binary double:
.IP "" .2i
rmtxop -fd view.vmx blinds.xml exterior.dmx > dcoef.dmx
.PP
To convert a BTDF matrix into a Radiance picture:
.IP "" .2i
rmtxop -fc blinds.xml > blinds.hdr
.PP
To extract the luminance values from a picture as an ASCII matrix:
.IP "" .2i
rmtxop -fa -c .265 .670 .065 image.hdr > image_lum.mtx
.PP
To render a melanopic illuminance image with
.I rtrace\:
.IP "" .2i
vwrays -ff -x 1024 -y 1024 -vf myview.vf |
rtrace -fff -cs 18 -co+ -i+ `vwrays -x 1024 -y 1024 -vf myview.vf -d` scene.oct |
rmtxop -fc -c M - > scene_meli.hdr
.PP
To scale a matrix by 4 and add it to the transpose of another matrix:
.IP "" .2i
rmtxop -s 4 first.mtx + -t second.mtx > result.mtx
.PP
To multiply elements of two matrices, then concatenate with a third,
applying a final transpose to the result:
.IP "" .2i
rmtxop first.mtx \\* second.mtx . third.mtx -t > result.mtx
.PP
To left-multiply the element-wise division of two matrices:
.IP "" .2i
rmtxop -fd numerator.mtx / denominator.mtx | rmtxop left.mtx - > result.mtx
.PP
To send the elements of a binary matrix to 
.I rcalc(1)
for further processing:
.IP "" .2i
rmtxop -fa orig.mtx | rcollate -ho -oc 1 | rcalc [operations]
.SH NOTES
Matrix concatenation is associative but not commutative, so order
matters to the result.
.I Rmtxop
takes advantage of this associative property to concatenate
from right to left when it reduces the number of basic operations.
If the rightmost matrix is a column vector for example, it is
much faster to concatenate from the right, and the result will
be the same.
Note that this only applies to concatenation;
element-wise addition, multiplication, and division are always
evaluated from left to right.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Ward
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cnt(1), dctimestep(1), getinfo(1), pcomb(1), pfilt(1),
ra_xyze(1), rcalc(1),
rcollate(1), rcomb(1), rcontrib(1), rcrop(1), rfluxmtx(1),
rtpict(1), rtrace(1), vwrays(1), wrapBSDF(1)
